add proposal for Locality LoadBalance (#574)
kmesh-net/kmesh: docs/proposal/kmesh_support_localityLB.md

   Calculation Process: Match according to the routing rules defined in the service load balancing scope. For example, if a service is configured with a region, the kmesh process's region is compared with the target backend's region. If they are the same, the priority value is incremented. After calculating the rank, the corresponding endpointKey is generated using the service ID, backend ID, and rank, thereby associating the service with the backend.

#### Data plane（kernel-space）
When a request is made to a service, the BPF program traverses the endpoint map to query the backend ID based on the requested service ID and count, following the priority rank. 
- In strict mode, only backends that match all scopes are considered.
- In failover mode, the BPF program will iterate through the ranks starting from the highest and moving downward. If there are backends stored at a particular priority level, one of the queried backends is selected at random to serve the request.

#### data struct
1. workload.h
```
typedef struct {
    __u32 service_id;    // service id

>     __u32 prio;          // prio means rank, 6 means match all, and 0 means match nothing

Reviewer: By adding this, how do we select a endpoint now?

Author: For random lb mode，workload will only be added to endpoint with maxprio(6).
For locality lb mode，workload will be added to endpoint with rank that calculated by matching kmesh processor's locality info with workload's locality info.
We also record the count number of endpoints belongs to which prio in  serviceValue, so that we can use it as it before. 
In the bpf prog, If service is in random lb mode, we can search endpoint with maxprio. if it is in locality lb mode, we will iter prio from maxprio to 0, if count of that prio >0, which means there have one or more endpoints in that prio, we can choose one workload index by random int value with count, and get endpoint whith serviceId, prio and workloadIndex.

Reviewer: make sense, not the bpf map update should be a little bit tricky

Reviewer: `0 means nothing` means what?

Author: prio value is from 0 to 6, 0 means the lowest priolity.

Reviewer: hmm, i would suggest the opposite. Because we can search from the highest priority easily

Author: Ok, I have updated it.

    __u32 backend_index; // if endpoint_count = 3, then backend_index = 0/1/2
} endpoint_key;
```

2. service

workload.h
```

> #define MAX_PRIO                  6

Reviewer: IIUC the max priority  rank can be `7`

 with 
	// Prefer traffic in the same region.
	LoadBalancing_REGION LoadBalancing_Scope = 1
	// Prefer traffic in the same zone.
	LoadBalancing_ZONE LoadBalancing_Scope = 2
	// Prefer traffic in the same subzone.
	LoadBalancing_SUBZONE LoadBalancing_Scope = 3
	// Prefer traffic on the same node.
	LoadBalancing_NODE LoadBalancing_Scope = 4
	// Prefer traffic in the same cluster.
	LoadBalancing_CLUSTER LoadBalancing_Scope = 5
	// Prefer traffic in the same network.
	LoadBalancing_NETWORK LoadBalancing_Scope = 6

Author: prio value is from 0 to 6, so i set MAX_PRIO as 6, which actually is the 7th rank.

---
title: Locality Load Balancing for Kmesh
authors:
- "@derekwin" # Authors' GitHub accounts here.
reviewers:
- "@kwb0523"
- "@hzxuzhonghu"
approvers:
- "@robot"
- TBD

creation-date: 2024-06-07

---

## Locality Load Balancing for Kmesh

### Summary

Add Locality Load Balancing to Kmesh workload mode.

### Motivation

Currently, Kmesh does not support locality aware load balancing. Locality Load Balancing optimizes performance and reliability in distributed systems by directing traffic to the nearest service instances. This approach reduces latency, enhances availability, and lowers costs associated with cross-region data transfers. It also ensures compliance with data sovereignty regulations and improves the overall user experience by providing faster and more reliable service responses.

### Goals

> The purpose of this proposal is to add locality aware load balancing capabilities to kmesh workload mode, corresponding to locality load balancing in Ztunnel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The purpose of this proposal is to add locality aware load balancing capabilities to kmesh workload mode, corresponding to locality load balancing in istio ambient mesh.
```

3. Added a `locality_cache` module on the user side to store locality aware information and priority calculation logic.
4. Updated `ServiceValue` and `EndpointKey` map on the user side.
5. We dynamically maintain endpoints corresponding to different priorities by updating the `EndpointKey`. To update the `EndpointKey` when updating the policy, we added an `endpoint_cache` to store additional endpoint information.
6. In the `workload_processor`, we updated the logic for adding and removing endpoints and services, as well as the logic for updating corresponding map information when processing workload and service xDs information. We implemented the LB update logic in `handleWorkloadUnboundServices`. To ensure service continuity, we considered scenarios during policy switching and implemented one-by-one `endpointKey` updates.
7. For the random policy, all endpoints are marked with a priority of 0. For failover or strict policy, the priority is set to 0 for the endpoint with the highest match according to the `routingPreference`.

#### control flow

> ![locality_lb_pic](pics/locality_lb.svg)

Reviewer 2: Please center the image

  - In `handleWorkload`, when handling workloads with service information, first execute the existing logic `handleDataWithService` to handle the service, then use `storeServiceBackend` to store the backend in `backendsByService`, and finally call `updateLocalityLBPrio`.
  - In `handleService`, call `updateLocalityLBPrio`.
  - In `removeWorkloadFromLocalityLBPrio`, perform a full update (since removing a workload requires updating the entire map, as the current `prio map` stores the backend UID list in an array form, making selective deletion of map elements impractical).

#### Data plane（kernel-space）
When a request is made for a service, the BPF program queries the backend UID list from the prio map using the request's service ID and iterates through the ranks. 
- In strict mode, it selects backends that match all scopes.
- In failover mode, it traverses the backend UID array starting from the highest rank and decrementing step by step. 
- From the queried backend UIDs, a backend is randomly selected to serve the request.

#### data struct
1. prio map

workload.h
```
typedef struct {
    __u32 service_id; // service id
    __u32 rank; // rank

> } prio_key;

Reviewer: what is the relationship with endpoint_map?

When we use this map, and when we  use the other?

typedef struct {
    __u32 count; // count of current prio

>     __u32 uid_list[MAP_SIZE_OF_PRIO]; // workload_uid to backend

Reviewer: This can waste memory

So why not add priority to endpoint key

update endpoint_key {

typedef struct {
    __u32 service_id;    // service id
    __u32 Priority,
    __u32 backend_index; // if endpoint_count = 3, then backend_index = 0/1/2
} endpoint_key;

    STRICT = 1;
    FAILOVER = 2;
  }
  repeated Scope routing_preference = 1;
  Mode mode = 2;
}
```

Add scope and mode information to the service map, and incorporate corresponding update logic into the control plane.

`bpf/kmesh/workload/include/workload.h`
```
typedef struct {
    __u32 endpoint_count;               // endpoint count of current service
    __u32 lb_policy;                    // load balancing algorithm
    __u32 service_port[MAX_PORT_COUNT]; // service_port[i] and target_port[i] are a pair, i starts from 0 and max value
                                        // is MAX_PORT_COUNT-1
    __u32 target_port[MAX_PORT_COUNT];
    struct ip_addr wp_addr;
    __u32 waypoint_port;
    __u8 balance_scope[MAX_SCOPE_COUNT]; // balance scope 
    __u8 balance_mode;                   // balance mode: Unspecified_mode 0; strict 1; failover 2
} service_value;
```

Add corresponding fields to the `pkg/controller/workload/bpfcache/service.go`, and update logic to `pkg/controller/workload/workload_processor.go`

2. Configure the locality (region, zone, subzone) and health status （HEALTHY, UNHEALTHY）of the backend. This corresponds to the message in workload.proto.

> > Although the current workload API defines seven scopes, when configuring a pod's locality, only region, zone, and subzone are configured. Therefore, matching capabilities can only be realized for these three scopes.

Reviewer: >only region, zone, and subzone are configured

where do you get this conclusion, at least NODE is supported now

Author: I misunderstood it before. I saw that in ztunnel, the NODE, NETWORK, and CLUSTER information were maintained within the workload, and I considering adding these informations to the bpf map of the backend later.

```
message Locality {
  string region = 1;
  string zone = 2;
  string subzone = 3;
}

message Workload {
    ...
    WorkloadStatus status = 17;
    Locality locality = 24;
    ...
}
enum WorkloadStatus {
  // Workload is healthy and ready to serve traffic.
  HEALTHY = 0;
  // Workload is unhealthy and NOT ready to serve traffic.
  UNHEALTHY = 1;
}
```

Add locality and healthStatus information to the backend map, and include corresponding update logic in the control plane.

`bpf/kmesh/workload/include/workload.h`
```
typedef struct {
    struct ip_addr addr;
    __u32 service_count;
    __u32 service[MAX_SERVICE_COUNT];
    struct ip_addr wp_addr;
    __u32 waypoint_port;

>     __u8 health_status; // workload_health_status_t: HEALTHY, UNHEALTHY

Reviewer: Currently we filtered out unhealthy workload

Author: So, only healthy workloads are stored in bpf map by the control plane. Does locality load balance not need to concern whether the workload is healthy or not?

Reviewer: We can make it simpler, even the priority set can be calculated in user space.

Author: Priority computation between localities occurs when a new flow is came. If priority calculation takes place at the control plane, my understanding is that we would need to precompute all possible scenarios（We are unable to perform event-driven programming that interoperates with user space, right?）, then hash different situations and store them in a BPF map. The kernel space would then query the map using source and destination locality information to obtain priority information. To simplify the problem, we could arrange combinations based on the specific values pointed to by the six routing options in scope (also including cases where only some of these match). This approach has two potential issues:
Firstly, userspace must enumerate all possible scenarios, which becomes particularly burdensome as the richness of locality information increases, leading to an exponential growth in the number of situations to be stored. Secondly, the BPF map would have to store all aforementioned scenarios, with each scenario existing in the form of the prio_map as currently designed.

Reviewer: My concern mainly on : 1. ebpf instruction limit  2. dataplane sorting performance Worth a try  though

>     locality_t locality;

Reviewer: What is locality_t then?

Author: I will add it in next commit.

---
title: Locality Load Balancing for Kmesh
authors:
- "@derekwin" # Authors' GitHub accounts here.
reviewers:
- "@kwb0523"
- "@hzxuzhonghu"
approvers:
- "@robot"
- TBD

creation-date: 2024-06-07

---

## Locality Load Balancing for Kmesh

### Summary

Add Locality Load Balancing to Kmesh workload mode.

### Motivation

Currently, Kmesh does not support locality topology-aware load balancing. Locality Load Balancing optimizes performance and reliability in distributed systems by directing traffic to the nearest service instances. This approach reduces latency, enhances availability, and lowers costs associated with cross-region data transfers. It also ensures compliance with data sovereignty regulations and improves the overall user experience by providing faster and more reliable service responses.

### Goals

The purpose of this proposal is to add locality-based topology-aware load balancing capabilities to kmesh workload mode, corresponding to locality load balancing in Ztunnel.

### Proposal

1. prioritize add locality load balancing capabilities in the workload mode.

> 2. locality load balancing mode: locality failover.

Reviewer: how about strict mode

#### locality failover

1. configure

Configure the load balance type (failover or strict) and scope (REGION, ZONE, etc.) in the service. This corresponds to the message LoadBalancing in workload.proto.
```
message LoadBalancing {
  enum Scope {
    UNSPECIFIED_SCOPE = 0;
    REGION = 1;
    ZONE = 2;
    SUBZONE = 3;
    NODE = 4;
    CLUSTER = 5;
    NETWORK = 6;
  }
  enum Mode {
    UNSPECIFIED_MODE = 0;
    STRICT = 1;
    FAILOVER = 2;
  }
  repeated Scope routing_preference = 1;
  Mode mode = 2;
}
```
https://pkg.go.dev/istio.io/istio/pkg/workloadapi#LoadBalancing_Scope

> 2. calculate locality match rank

Reviewer: group endpoints with prority

Calculate the rank based on the locality of the src and the locality of all target endpoints in the service according to the configuration in loadbalance. This rank indicates the priority of endpoint selection.
- The target endpoints are all healthy endpoints.

3. choose endpoint

> Randomly select one endpoint from the group with the highest rank as the service backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Randomly select one endpoint from the group with the highest priority
```

And add more comments what we do if all the endpoints of high priority is unhealthy

Reviewer: And  for the strict mode, how would you select the endpoint, i would like to see that

4. maybe more？ Panic threshold

> When the proportion of healthy endpoints in the high-rank group falls below the panic threshold, select endpoints from the next rank group.

Reviewer: I donot care about this at first. First respect workload healthy status

    source_workload_v = map_lookup_frontend(&srouce_workload_k); // 用map_lookup_frontend 复用现有的frontend map
    if (!source_workload_v) {
        return -ENOENT;
    }
    ...
}
```

`bpf/kmesh/workload/include/frontend.h`
```
static inline int frontend_manager(ctx_buff_t *ctx, frontend_value *frontend_v, source_workload_value *source_workload_v)
{
    ...
    ret = service_manager(ctx, frontend_v->upstream_id, source_workload_v->upstream_id, service_v); // 增加传入source_workload的id
    ...
}
```

`bpf/kmesh/workload/include/service.h`
```
static inline int service_manager(ctx_buff_t *ctx, __u32 service_id, __u32 source_workload_id, service_value *service_v)
{
    ...
    case LB_POLICY_FAILOVER:
        ret = lb_locality_failover_handle(ctx, service_id, source_workload_id, service_v);
        break;
    ...
}
```

3. Add locality and healthStatus information to the backend map, and include corresponding update logic in the control plane.

`bpf/kmesh/workload/include/workload.h`
```
typedef struct {
    __u32 ipv4; // backend ip
    __u32 service_count;
    __u32 service[MAX_SERVICE_COUNT];
    __u32 waypoint_addr;
    __u32 waypoint_port;
    // 增加健康状态 healthStatus

>     // 增加locality信息

Reviewer: Please supplement what does this field look like.

---
title: Locality Load Balancing for Kmesh
authors:
- "@derekwin" # Authors' GitHub accounts here.
reviewers:
- "@kwb0523"
- "@hzxuzhonghu"
approvers:
- "@robot"
- TBD

creation-date: 2024-06-07

---

## Locality Load Balancing for Kmesh

### Summary

Add Locality Load Balancing to Kmesh.

### Motivation

Currently, kmesh does not support locality topology-aware load balancing. Locality Load Balancing optimizes performance and reliability in distributed systems by directing traffic to the nearest service instances. This reduces latency, enhances availability, and lowers costs associated with cross-region data transfers. It also helps ensure compliance with data sovereignty regulations and improves overall user experience by providing faster and more reliable service responses.

> #### Goals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Goals
```

The purpose of this proposal is to add locality-based topology-aware load balancing capabilities to kmesh, corresponding to locality load balancing in Istio.

### Proposal

1. prioritize add locality load balancing capabilities in the workload mode.

> 2. two types of locality load balancing : locality failover, locality weighted distribution.

Reviewer: I am not sure how **locality weighted distribution** can be implemented in workload mode. The workload api does not support weight actually

#### case 1. locality failover
1. Destination Rule
Same as Istion. Parse rules specify configuration for Locality load balancing. (todo: outlier detection settings to detect and evict unhealthy hosts from the load balancing pool.)

>     - Outlier detection should occur before load balancing.

Reviewer: This does not suite worklaod mode as workload api does not include outlier setting. It do LB based on where the endpoint resides.
